fire lookouts were built everywhere in
means to control fires just spot them
and be able to get them out right over
the hill in the 1800s the Walden fire
burnt everything people ran into the
river to try to stay out and they got
boiled so back when they had no control
over forest fires they put up these also
an effort to give men work at one time
there were thousands and thousands of
them all over and now I believe that
there's 900 left and then of those just
maybe a couple hundred that are actually
operating so somebody would come live
here for the summer and spot fires
[Music]
most lookouts are built just like this
it's a 14 foot square with the
360-degree windows which is really
incredible to lay here and write or just
think about life and take in the views
especially if there's a storm coming
that you get a watch it's like the most
epic thing ever to be encapsulated in
here with a warm fire when it's pouring
rain or snowing outside it's really
magical I have 13 acres so it goes down
to the road this way and actually down
to the road the other way so I don't
think I've seen all four corners of the
property really I just had a short list
of like 10 builds that I wanted to do
and the fire lookout it's one of them
but they're really hard to come by
because there's only like 900 I think
still in existence and they're usually
on Forest Service land so you have to
buy one that's been taken down and then
you have to like redirect it and it's
that's a big deal to find and to do but
I happen to just be googling on the way
back from my hobbit hole my mom was
driving and I found an article that said
fire lookout for sale and I'm like you
know the Internet this was probably
posted 10 years ago and it's old or
whatever but it was only a year old and
it was an Idaho which is my home state
and so I was like freaking out and so I
reached out to the realtor and just said
hey this long shot and though it's been
a year but is this place still available
and he's like oh it is
this town is without cell service
people don't really operate on the same
pages the rest of the world and they're
lovely for it so I don't know they might
be on to something
yeah what's going on are you training
behind there oh not all of Idaho looks
like this this is not the potato country
this is the logging country of Idaho
you guys we're looking for a mile marker
we need the mile marker four point five
over there therefore I'm beside the tree
right there
it's a four point five is it a four it's
a four okay one point five now could be
four point five nine yeah and that's a
super steep driveway it's four and a
half that's it yeah exactly
crystal peek look out stop yes only stop
yep a perfect perfect mom yeah
ATVs can go up here true
[Music]
nope it's a dead snake snake where
bernstone s Christie walking a veil oh
my gosh that's a little intimidating I
have its rough rough rough roads leads a
beautiful destination before we try to
sell people on this is the pathway that
leads to the treehouse me and my mom
came here our last months building the
house if I had to say what an occupation
was I would say I'm a builder however I
make my money from vacation rentals but
our building experiences I guess
something along those lines
and finding these really out-of-the-way
places that's sort of a component I
think yes there's I look for cheap land
I look for cheap deals but there's
always like a catch to why it's cheap
this one the road and in the winter the
snows up to here
so I actually bought a snow cat last
year a vintage snow cat and redid it and
George brings people up in the snow cat
it's a tough winter up here then I
wouldn't say tough but you got to be
prepared I would say it's tough yeah I
would it's beautiful and it's hard
yeah the toughest part of this yeah is
the hike during the winter because we
don't have we wanted snow cats that come
up but that 90-degree corner at the
bottom scary
it comes up fine but going down bit
scary it's still yeah yeah they guys
never knew they're not sure now it's
part of the snowshoe now up to do the
turnovers so you found when you came it
wasn't quite like this no no there's a
huge building here where that was super
rat infested falling down garbage kind
of just from being abandoned for so many
years the strap is probably going to
break but you needed a little bit more
distance between the shed and the truck
and the thing seems so flimsy
this is actually my most expensive
property but there was a building
already on it and a really unique one at
that so the frame is not the original
frame this was off a I think he said a
sanitation some sort of government
building that he got at auction so the
cab is all original I replaced at least
half of the windows and then
restructured it just so it was kind of
bare-bones and and still set up to be a
fire lookout and so now it's a little
bit more comfortable
Roxy stay you stay did you have to bring
a lot of material yes clearing
everything out all the junk out was one
thing but I could just throw it over the
edge and then drag it through the forest
I did put in the pulley so that helped
sometimes but my boards right there
yeah bringing it up was tough I actually
had to make the hatch much smaller so
that there was more floor space so you
can see the line here this is how big it
used to be and going back to here but
that made it so I couldn't really the
door was just too heavy I've always I
[Music]
mean there's something so amazing about
a structure that was meant to be yeah
yeah exactly
so this is where the Sun sets in the
summer and you can sometimes see a
little bit of the city lights the few of
them that there are there's these huge
trees if you can kind of see through
here this is logging land on the next
hump over
of the mountain and so that is clear-cut
right on the other side of us we have
moose up here so sometimes they come in
here the moose came back he's right
outside the lookout because he loves us
we're friendly I really wanted to see
the moose and my mom really didn't want
to
I believe we were 25 feet to the deck so
that would be because yeah wherever it
was originally and I don't they built
like an identical one right by it and so
that's why this one had to be taken down
so I don't know why they did but it was
in the same view so they took this one
down the fire lookouts have this round
map of the mountain range and it has
like this weird dial thing so when they
see a fire they can pinpoint it and
radio the coordinates and it's just
basically a radio log you'll get like
hikers coming up or when I was reading
in it there was a call for a woman who
was having a giving birth and I was like
oh that kid would be like my age would
be so fun to find him but it doesn't
have any name or anything the radio log
so this was originally the stranger fire
lookout but small to medium fluffy smoke
so light blue smoke behind the ridge
keeps coming up and then can you
describe the smoke better so it's just
like a correspondence back and forth and
I was so excited when I found this
transcription of the communication yes
yeah these are Oh
so here is the passenger having labour
pain she would like an emergency buckle
contact the seat role and then the state
parole person tells her that she must
calm down so I'm sure she was excited to
hear that yeah so crazy
83 Oh
from 1981 that's when that baby but this
is moved in 83 so this stuff is still
going on still being used in yeah there
are still some there's just not a lot I
think that the fire spotting has got
they have different means of doing that
but they still serve as like kind of a
ranger station out in the middle of
nowhere and so this one did have one of
the circle maps but so usually that
would be right in the center of your
room because your hatch would be on the
deck but I kept to pay homage to the
whole map thing I had this one printed
which is this drop leaf table and we are
right here Crystal peak lookout since
the lookouts had that these maps I knew
I needed to have that in here way down
here is the nearest town how how big
he's from um I think there are six
hundred people so this just your version
of a dining table yeah we have these
stools and our doing hot it feels like a
good laugh not the last guest but the
guests before was like I think we broke
her so yeah pretty scary me yes I did
this is like a horse blanket for the
seat and then built this bed frame out
of just pieces it's posts at cedar posts
yeah
and these built-ins I built all up here
the original fireplace and it was right
here so I had to move the stovepipe cut
a hole in the ceiling I'm like okay be
I'm right in the middle I went to go
drill my hole and of course there's a
that's where the beam is so that's why I
have this whoo what do you think to go
to the side of the beam and you brought
this up here yes I had a plan like
because this is hundreds of pounds and I
had a whole plan but we pretty much just
did it step by step and now it's very
heavy you were trying to go over the
latest thing possible no I just wanted
the window and you can cook on top of it
and stuff it's cool so the fire would
come
Puli yep hey you wanna come up yes
bring them up right let me show you how
to operate the secret it doesn't have
running water but we have a little
Colgan thing of water and so you have to
pump this just like that how do you get
the water we fill it up with a jug we
have to bring it up and we usually tell
people to bring up a little bit more cuz
that's two and a half gallons and I got
it like a little cooler here the ice
just melts and there's a tube that
connects it down to the floor so you
just built in
I just under mounted a cooler so that
you would be able to bring ice and keep
some food cold
I like how you don't show any cooler
yeah I don't want any plastic you for
sure yeah
so this is a little garbage chute I
wanted it to actually go all the way
down but there was some beams in the way
and sink and then we have a little stove
we have a the stove here and then this
is the fuel canisters that it takes so
can't me stove again yep yep just a
camping stove and then we just have you
know your normal utensils I mean you can
pretty much cook there pretty good meal
and we have some cast iron pans and then
all these enamel pans and I picked up
every one of these from different
antique stores so that might have been
typical of what people were eating in
yeah in the fire lookout its hayday you
don't want anything I guess that you're
gonna have at your house they don't want
you to really feel like you're away so
because I wouldn't want you to be like
oh yeah my aunt has that you know and so
that's why I end up building a lot of
the things in my houses
this and the side were all one and then
I built this too and this and those to
match it because this think that I
bought was too wide to fit into one of
these so I had to create this space for
it yeah it's very deep and it wasn't
accepting that this is an antique
grinder and so you turn it to grind your
coffee and then we have pour over coffee
here most lookouts I mean all lookouts I
guess are closed down in the winter and
we stay open I just check - so all of
these panels can drop yeah oh that one
went down down oh they're supposed to be
hinged so I'm gonna have to run down
there to bring it back up but so this
has the metal roof that protects that
plywood a bit but we have to drop them
down in the winter and then guests have
to lift in the or else it'll get so snow
loaded I woke up last winter to a
blizzard where there was about a foot of
snow and so I had a lower all these and
and I'm like I have to get out now or
else I'm going to be snowed in and so I
had to take these all day out and like
you know I have to be on my tiptoes but
there was so much snow on it it slammed
me everyone against the window and I had
to do it all the way around the tech was
my whole side was bruised there was no
other way I couldn't I tried to like
scrape off but you can't get to the
corners these usually just stay up in
the summer time but when fire lookouts
closed out for the winter they would
close all of these panels and then just
like a winch it to protect it you don't
have people getting into it otherwise
you're just gonna wake up with a Sun
which is fine because there's no shades
windows all the way around do you want
I don't know what happened if there's
fingers here yeah there is put them in
the basket I guess oh gosh I thought it
would just went sorry did you worry
about this at all like safety or no I
literally had it open like sleeping
everything I would always just have it
open there's the other little splitter
this one I really like actually it's
called the kindling cracker and for
somebody who's not good with an axe you
can just put that there and and pound it
and it splits it really well both in
stick out the same amount yeah just kind
of balance it on the top of the basket I
guess okay coming up
watch your head just in case I wish I
knew that if they could get in it tell
me if I'm going too fast if you think
they're gonna fall out there's a lot of
books from people that lived in fire our
lookouts because a lot of a bit more
writers they just spent hours and hours
and hours a pair alone so I felt like I
got a little bit of that when I built go
just up here there was nobody for ever
it's a lot of Solitude woohoo okay I
wore it because you were up here for how
long two and a half months but you lived
here full-time
yep yeah just working every day
although yeah pretty much exactly I wish
it was an elevator so I could get in it
though my mom came up for a couple weeks
and then yeah so you had a lot of time
alone up here I'm alone a lot if
that was very unexpected yeah so these
usually just stay open during the summer
you could put it down for shade but most
people just let it be open and then I
have little tiny solar panels that feed
these lights yeah so I got like these
really cheap little solar lights and
then I found these at an antique store
and had a wire and cobble them all
together to make it work and then we
have just another tiny little panel but
it has all these USBs so you can charge
your phone there's a little bit of power
not a lot but a little bit and we are
now part of the lookout Network so we
get these every month and so some of
these dharma bombs is Jack Kerouac and
he stays on the lookout so there's oh
I'm like out in there and this is the
book that this burn that Teddy Roosevelt
initiated all these fire lookouts being
burned or being built and this happened
just over the hill and like the people
literally like boiled in the river the
person that sold me this lookout he said
that my lookout was in this book fire
lookouts at the northwest so I got on
Amazon this book is three hundred and
fifty dollars on Amazon so I did not buy
it instead I found ray and I emailed him
and I sent him some pictures and I said
hey do you happen to know anything about
my lookout here I just bought it and I'm
remodeling it and he said yes my son is
the one who moved it there and he has a
fire lookout Museum in Spokane
Washington in his house so it's really a
thing yeah yeah
fascination let's go hit this way is how
we do the sheets but who knows what
actually happened I had originally
sketched it out that it would go this
way but I felt like it was too close to
the fire so I ended up making it more
this daybed style position that chair
was from the original lookout and I went
and got like a poncho at Goodwill and
that's what it's covered with because
the leather was
torn up by rats this was very
rat-infested
probably 20 ish years so yeah so there
was this old woodshed and it was up by
the lookout and it was literally like
the leaning tower it was on its last leg
my oldest brother Matt is in town he got
in about midnight last night and today
we're trying to beat the storm and move
this shed Matt is tying an Alpine
butterfly knot and then a chain around
the tree and we put black ABS pipe
underneath of it that was a little wider
than the house and we did about 10 rows
and then we would move it a couple
inches at a time
this is falling forward just being held
with the rope we used kind of a pulley
system my mom held the rope and I would
take a pipe from the back and put it in
the front and then we'd go four more
inches and then again and again and
again first attempt actually second
attempt we broke a rope oh yeah see that
moving awesome
[Music]
part that was nerve-wracking coming down
the hill is it was not only leaning
structurally but like leaning forward
and so it just looked like it was just
gonna topple over and be sticks you know
and my mom and I built this deck and I
did it out of treated lumber I looked
everywhere on the internet to see if
anybody had built a deck out of treated
lumber because usually it's just the
base and you put whatever on the top but
I just kept thinking like I'm gonna have
to paint or stain this literally every
year because of the winners and stuff I
didn't find anybody who had done it but
I couldn't figure out a reason why not -
so it's a whole treated lumber deck and
we inset this fire pit in there and I
built these anter on deck chairs and
then so there's I made it into a sauna
on the inside and I think there's water
in here so I'm not going to dump it on
me but we have a bucket shower again I'm
not going to do it but we feel a barrel
there is a spring we don't have running
water up to here there's a spring I know
how far it is but it's down and up back
up the mountain so George it fills up a
barrel that is in the trees up here and
at gravity feeds - right here and then
this is our only like your only source
of water so the idea is to get all
warmed up in there pour this freezing
cold water on you hop back in side and I
got this door for like seven bucks off
Craigslist on one of my lumber runs and
then this fireplace was in the lookout
this is the original one and I wanted
one that had a window in the lookout so
I actually repurposed it down here and
then these rocks are just from down the
road we built this great around it to be
able to pour your water on and it heats
up yeah yeah we did all the insulation
and then put a foil barrier I actually
ran out of the foil stuff how to go down
to the Merc
by tinfoil so it's actually finished off
a little bit with tinfoil and then all
the cedar planking and we have the
timers in the bucket real candles were
getting too messy so we have tea lights
smells great
yeah it's not like the theater has all
the age to it yeah it gets made out of
the same stuff of the lookout this
paddle I found and I could not find the
other one I searched and searched and
searched but there's a dog bone factory
in Twin Falls Idaho that I had my sister
go to and she sent me pictures cuz I'm
like go find a moose paddle that's the
same size you know and they sell it to
you by the weight so it was super cheap
I think the things that I love the most
are it's because it was so hard so I
think that's probably why but you know
it makes so you don't feel like you ever
have to leave here
yeah more for me okay ah so mr. bass
tastes like Pixy Stix you found some
strawberries too
no you did you like procedure if the
candy you know yeah it's totally it's
actually bad yeah maybe that's why they
came up with idea
we actually have most of the wood
delivered but it comes in like these big
chunks here and so it still has to be
split down and so we have a number of
different splitters we have one up on
the deck that will fit like roughly this
size and a mallet that you hit it with
we leave a lot cut then you'll get
guests that want to come up here and
chop wood and and they'll have split it
for us
I joke that my property is you just come
and do chores but some people's lives
are too easy fun vacation
here's the barrel that's the system
we've rigged up this black pipe at one
point they were getting water all the
way up here from the creek which is on
the other mountain I've only been able
to get like a trickle with it being
gravity fed because there's no power
there's nothing there's a spigot there
that he can fill up a tank and then pump
it into this one it's just a little
12-volt thing there wasn't really an
option no there's no so down here I have
the little outhouse this was here and
it's the cutest outhouse ever yeah it's
it's stout it was a pit one I covered up
the pit and now it's like a bucket
system with the wood shavings and I mean
how it works
well I won't show you how it works I'll
explain so we have wood shavings here so
once you use a restroom you just scoop
this cover up anything in there and it's
super absorbing this is like guinea pig
like pet bedding sort of stuff so it
expands really well and then there's
just a five gallon bucket and we use
these IO degradable composting bags
here's the bucket and then the bag is
bungeed around it and then the guest
will just tie it off and we have a
compost bin behind
that they just throw it in and it's all
covered up and it takes about a year for
you to want to put any of that on
vegetables we don't really grow anything
so it just goes back into the earth and
that's it yeah so that's the only thing
that I changed in here back here is the
compost bin half of that size would
support a family of four for a year so
it's more than enough
people ask a lot because lots of people
want to do it and they're like so who'd
you get alone or did you get investors
and no it's just I do everything myself
so it's inexpensive and I look for
really cheap deals I just work out of my
own capital so if I had more money I
would be building a lot faster this is
probably a good thing in case it gives
me a break so if I was smart I would
have built just a dozen tree houses in
Hawaii like that's what everybody said
because it was so successful but but I
don't think it'd be as rewarding if I
was just in one spot doing the same
thing over and over so I got a potato
recently this is the potato which
requires some explanation
the Idaho Potato Commission has a 6-ton
potato that rides on the back of a semi
truck around the country and I was their
spokesperson for two years and I
traveled with it just all over the
country I was like this is bigger than
my tiny house I'm gonna move it into my
backyard I I call dibs on this and then
eight years later they finally upgraded
to a fiberglass version and they gifted
me the old potato so I just recently
finished that off and then it's got a
grain silo with a really beautiful
bathroom in it and that's in Boise Idaho
so that's where I was living - the
potato and sometimes I've come out of
the potato and there be people at the
road like looking at it and we were like
what just happened cuz you can't kind of
see that there's a door so it's crazy
but I'm building a little tiny house
just for codes there I got in system
they don't have a code with my bathroom
is separate than the living quarter so
their solution is that I build a
residence so that this can be the
accessory rebuilding so this is it right
now so you've done a lot three days
there are three very long days but this
is the finished version of it I'm
actually going to build two of these
into end with a space in between and
then I'm gonna build a greenhouse around
it that will be in this kind of
traditional barn shape and those tiny
houses will be up in this peak so the
one I'm building now is just to get code
as quickly as possible so I'm doing
bare-bones but my cow since she's like
my soul mate
I have got Windows that I can open up so
she can stick her head in because she is
that friendly
here she comes
look at that cow run run this is her
eating the guidebook that I just barely
made and protected it I bought an
Airstream last summer that just popped
up and it was really cheap and I
wouldn't bought it and I want to put it
somewhere in the southwest so now I'll
go look in the Southwest to put it
somewhere to me I've never wanted to put
a bunch of unique things in one plot
which lots of people do and it makes
total sense and I can't be bothered with
it
I actually don't drink coffee I kind of
build like people do marathon races or
something it's like everything I have
emotionally and physically and
financially I'm just spent at the end of
it and it's so rewarding but I don't
know how long I can do that but right
now I'm like I'm healthy and I love it
so I'm gonna do it for as long as I'm
still having fun
you